[Music]
hello and welcome to my podcast i'm
brett hall and i've called this podcast
topcast the tok bit at the front being
an acronym for theory of knowledge toc
which is a branch of philosophy commonly
called epistemology and that's something
i'm interested in
if you know how knowledge is created
it's easier to spot errors in thinking
or reasoning in just about any other
subject because those other subjects
whether they're scientific or religious
or philosophical mathematical political
ethical and so on they claim to be
producing knowledge and although there
are important differences in the means
by which they produce knowledge it's the
fundamental similarities the fundamental
way knowledge is created generally
speaking regardless of the subject area
that makes epistemology so interesting
and so deep so that's why this is top
cast
also
talk or if you pronounce it doc
so harden the consonant sounds to get
doc in korean it means something like
clever or quick or fast thinking at
least the full word
does and i don't mean i'm clever i mean
some of the ideas i'll be discussing are
very clever
actually toc on its own is onomatopoeia
for drip in korean which makes sense
when you think about it
so maybe i shouldn't really concentrate
on the korean meaning of the podcast
because then apparently it doesn't mean
clever podcast after all it means grip
cast
anyways i once around 10 years ago had a
podcast of the same name topcast that
was explicitly about epistemology now
that's gone and my views have changed in
many ways on the topic so this new
podcast will in part be about those new
views that i've got about epistemology
but as you can see from the first few
episodes i'm going to devote very many
of these
to the work of physicist and philosopher
david deutsch in particular david's work
at the beginning of infinity which is
his second book now as of today the day
that i'm recording this i've completed
10 videos already online they're on
youtube about the beginning of infinity
and so this podcast is going to be the
audio only version of those
as i'm only up to chapter 6 and there
are 18 chapters this could mean
something like 30 episodes in full for
the beginning of infinity or boi as some
of us abbreviate it to
when that's done my plan is to turn to
for4 which is david's first book the
fabric of reality
this podcast series really is intended
as a reading companion for the books of
david deutsch now it's not because such
a reading companion is needed the books
stand alone by themselves perfectly well
but philosophy is as much about the
discussion as about the reading both are
needed and although this is going to be
a one way thing with me talking to you
it helps to have things put in other
words sometimes
the philosopher neuroscientist and
podcaster sam harris said during an
introduction to his first interview with
david that he sam during that interview
had to struggle and go back to unpack
the import of some very simple sounding
statements which sam says many people
struggle to pass the way david intends
and i think that's quite right and
really that's the motivation for my
series of videos and this podcast series
david has made some amazing discoveries
across both science and philosophy his
work touches on morality politics
economics mathematics physics biology
computation epistemology it really is
amazingly broad as well as fundamentally
deep the topics david's work has solved
problems in and made progress in
are that broad of course the casual
observer notices that david is probably
most famous for his discovery of quantum
computation
so as alan turing was to the classical
computer david deutsch is to the quantum
computer
but actually groundbreaking as that work
was in actually creating an entirely new
area of physics and engineering namely
the entire field of quantum computation
and our multi-billion dollar research
industry with almost every developed
country in the world racing to build a
full-scale quantum computer
even though david is the key person most
fundamentally responsible for giving
birth to that field impressive as that
is that is not the reason many of us are
so drawn to his work
his discoveries and philosophy broadly
are just as significant in that field as
quantum computation is in the field of
physics but the language used to express
these new ideas david has discovered is
typically expressed in existing
vocabulary and so this means that when
you hear or read some word david uses
you may not realize its import as sam
says
but some of us like me think that import
is of such import that we can't just let
people not notice it terrible use of
double negatives there brett
so i hope you'll enjoy noticing this
import with me i'm not generally much
interested in introductions so as you'll
see in my other podcast there's no
lengthy chat at the beginning i usually
just leap straight into the book i'm
also calling these podcasts top casts so
that you know this is me talking and
these are my interpretations of for now
the beginning of infinity i am myself of
course not above making serious blunders
and trying to understand david's work or
anything in the beginning of infinity so
i don't want anyone to think this is
anything like an official boi podcast
mistakes really are all mine and the top
cast name will give me the option at
some point in the future perhaps to do
the odd episode not devoted entirely to
either boi or for
i'd really like to grapple soon with
constructor theory which is another one
of david's profound
discoveries recently the most
fundamental of all theories so far as we
think it's a more fundamental than
quantum computation you can find out
more at
www.constructortheory.org to learn about
that and also i'd like to do some
discussions about some other books
perhaps the book super intelligence by
nick bostrom is high on my list for that
and just before i finish this
introduction i should make a few remarks
about why david's work is so special why
are these books deserving of so many
hours of audio where there must be other
equally deserving works
well like sam harris i read the fabric
of reality david's first book when it
was published in 1997 and it left a
profound impression on me at that time i
was enrolled at university studying
physics and i was always reading popular
science books my favorites at that time
were usually by the physicist paul
davies he's written many excellent
popular science books he once won the
templeton prize for his book the mind of
god which despite its name isn't
primarily about god at all it's a book
about physics and philosophy and
mathematics it's a popular science book
it hints in that book at the mysterious
nature of quantum theory in certain
areas of mathematics it also ties some
of this to philosophy especially to
ancient philosophy
physics students like to read popular
science books like this because when
you're doing an undergraduate degree in
physics and you're learning for the
first time about quantum theory it is
often conceptually very very difficult
to understand what's going on so popular
science books provide some additional
explanation
the problem is that the additional
explanations you get in popular science
books are often even more confusing than
what you get in lectures
now the mind of god by paul davies is
indeed an excellent book but it's really
part of a long line of popular science
books that have been written before and
since it's an overview it's an attempt
to explain some mysterious scientific
ideas in plain language and in many
places especially the stuff on quantum
theory it emphasizes the mystery and
revels in it to the point you are
supposed to be confused
every popular science account seems to
take feynman's words if you think you
understand quantum mechanics you don't
understand quantum mechanics as some
sort of doctrinal foundational claim
in other words you're supposed to be
confused about quantum theory
what sets david's work apart is that it
explicitly does not do this it rejects a
lack of clarity on quantum theory and on
every topic it rejects the mystery and
instead substitutes straightforward
common sense explanations
books like the mind of god or any of
countless other popular science books
provide an overview of interesting
science as i've said that's indeed the
purpose of popular science but i'm not
making podcasts about those books so
what makes the fabric of reality or the
beginning of infinity special
well i'm not the only one just by the
way anyone who thinks of themselves as a
fan of popular science books
knows that the fabric of reality really
does stand apart
i don't just mean it's better i mean
it's a part it's different
yes there is the popular science aspect
to it david does explain some technical
science in clear plain english but
there's something far more important
going on
it's a world view
it's a way of looking not just at some
narrow area of science but it's a way of
looking at everything
and that is why it's deserving of so
much more special attention indeed the
fabric of reality is the scientists
popular science book
the back of the fabric of reality has
recommendations by people like paul
davies and indeed this is the reason i
picked it up in the first place because
it was recommended by paul davies
professor davies is quoted on the back
of the fabric of reality as
saying and i'll quote here quote
one of britain's most original thinkers
in this major work david deutsch
confronts the deepest questions of
existence head on
i haven't been so inspired since i read
douglas hofstadter's girdle escher bark
so that's paul davies
another comment on the back of the book
is by the author julian brown and what
he wrote was quote
reading this book might just change your
life the theory of everything quantum
mechanics virtual reality scientific
method evolution the significance of
life quantum computation the nature of
mathematics time travel the end of our
universe all these and much else find
their place
crackles with originality this is an
awesome book
so that was julian brown and i think
that's correct i mean life-changing and
awesome so as good as any other popular
science book was i'd never quite use
those words except about boi and for
attempting to say why they are
life-changing and awesome without
reading them both is too hard a task
they help you to think to learn to think
in better new ways so that colors
everything you think about which is
obviously a lot and that's how the books
change your life and why they deserve a
podcast
okay enough about all that i hope you
enjoy learning more about the work of
david deutsch beginning with the
beginning of infinity series as much as
i've enjoyed making them bye
[Music]
you